-THE FIRST EDITION
OF "LOOSE CHANGE"
WAS VERY UNDERGROUND.
THERE WAS NO GOOGLE VIDEO,
THERE WAS NO YouTube.
THE FILM WAS DISTRIBUTED
PRIMARILY THROUGH TORRENT SITES
AND FILE-SHARING.
AND IT DIDN'T REALLY HIT
THAT SWELL
UNTIL THE SECOND EDITION
CAME OUT LATER THAT YEAR.
-CHARLIE SHEEN CONTACTED ME
THIS WEEK,
AND HE WANTS TO BE
THE VOICEOVER FOR FINAL CUT.
-YEAH, HE WAS TELLING ME THAT.
YOU KNOW,
CHARLIE KNEW ABOUT 9/11.
AND THEN HE SAW "LOOSE CHANGE"
AND HE FINALLY CLICKED AND SAID,
"I JUST GOT TO SAY SOMETHING."
-YOU KNOW, WHEN I GOT
THAT DELIVERY
OF THE FIRST 1,000 DVDs
OF "LOOSE CHANGE,"
I THOUGHT THAT WAS GONNA BE IT.
I THOUGHT THAT I WOULD
EVENTUALLY SELL THOSE
OVER THE COURSE
OF A COUPLE MONTHS,
AND THEN PEOPLE WOULD STOP
CARING AND THAT WOULD BE THAT.
BUT THEY WENT PRETTY QUICKLY,
AND BEFORE I KNEW IT,
I WAS PUTTING IN ANOTHER ORDER
FOR ANOTHER 1,000,
AND THEN ANOTHER 1,000,
AND THEN ANOTHER 1,000.
AND THEN KPFK CONTACTED US,
AND THEY WANTED 10,000.
AND I WAS ON MY WAY
OUT THE FRONT DOOR,
AND CHESTER KIND OF STOPPED ME
AND WAS LIKE,
"I KNOW YOU GUYS ARE, LIKE,
"FINISHING UP THIS NEW EDITION
OF THE FILM.
"GOOGLE IS STARTING
THIS NEW VIDEO-SHARING SERVICE
"WHERE YOU CAN UPLOAD,
YOU KNOW, VIDEOS,
"AND YOU CAN UPLOAD
FULL FILMS IF YOU WANT.
PEOPLE CAN CHECK THEM OUT."
AND I KIND OF BLEW IT OFF AT THE
TIME, KIND OF SHRUGGED IT OFF.
I WAS JUST LIKE,
"WELL, I DON'T KNOW
"IF ANYONE'S GONNA WANT TO WATCH
A FULL FILM ONLINE.
"I DON'T KNOW
IF ANYONE'S GONNA WANT TO SIT
IN FRONT OF THEIR COMPUTER FOR
AN HOUR AND A HALF, TWO HOURS."
AND I TURNED OUT TO BE
VERY, VERY WRONG ABOUT THAT
BECAUSE GOOGLE VIDEO WAS THE
WHOLE REASON WE BECAME POPULAR.
AND THE FUNNY THING IS,
WE WEREN'T THE ONES
THAT PUT "LOOSE CHANGE"
ON GOOGLE VIDEO.
NOT THAT WE DIDN'T WANT IT
ON THERE.
IT'S JUST IT NEVER REALLY
OCCURRED TO US TO DO IT.
IT WAS ONLY UNTIL OTHER PEOPLE
STARTED UPLOADING IT,
AND THEN PEOPLE IN OTHER
COUNTRIES STARTED TRANSLATING IT
AND RE-UPLOADING IT
IN THEIR LANGUAGES...
I THINK, YOU KNOW, GOOGLE VIDEO
AND "LOOSE CHANGE"
BOTH KIND OF HIT THEIR SWELL
AT THE SAME TIME.
BEFORE WE KNEW IT, THE STORY
ESSENTIALLY WENT VIRAL.
-IN 1958,
AT THE PEAK OF THE COLD WAR,
ARPA WAS CREATED BY PRESIDENT
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER.
-WE MUST TAKE IMMEDIATE
AND RESOLUTE ACTION.
-ARPA BROUGHT IN BBN TO ASSIST
IN CREATING A WAY
TO NETWORK COMPUTERS TOGETHER.
IT WAS CALLED ARPANET.
JUST 15 YEARS LATER,
LEADING ENGINEERS BEGAN
CONNECTING ARPANET WITH PRNET,
USING RADIO SIGNALS TO CONNECT
COMPUTER NETWORKS.
BY 1976,
THE PROJECT WAS COMPLETE.
THE FOLLOWING YEAR,
A CONNECTION WAS CONSTRUCTED
TO LINK ARPANET AND PRNET
TO SATNET.
THIS SOON BECAME TERMED
"INTERNETWORKING,"
OR THE INTERNET, IF YOU'RE INTO
THE WHOLE BREVITY THING.
THEN, BY 1990, A GENTLEMAN
NAMED TIM BERNERS-LEE
ENGINEERED AN INTERFACE
FOR THE AVERAGE INDIVIDUAL
TO USE THE INTERNET.
THIS WAS THE BIRTH OF THE WORLD
WIDE WEB AS WE KNOW IT TODAY.
IN ALL OF HUMAN HISTORY,
AT LEAST THE PARTS
WE'RE TOLD ABOUT,
THIS MAY BE
THE MOST PIVOTAL MOMENT YET.
PRIOR TO THE 1990s,
IDEAS WERE SHARED BY TELEVISION,
PRINT...
RADIO...
ENTERTAINMENT COMPANIES...
AND VERY SLOWLY
BY MERGING CULTURES.
THEN COMES THE INTERNET,
LEVELING THE PLAYING FIELD.
IDEAS ARE NOW SPREAD ACROSS
BORDERS AND OCEANS INSTANTLY,
UNFILTERED BY MARKETING
ENGINEERS AND INVESTORS.
INSTANTANEOUS SHARING OF
AUTHENTIC AND RAW INSPIRATION.
THIS IS THE RISE
OF A NEW ARTISTIC RENAISSANCE,
A REVOLUTION OF CREATIVITY.
HISTORICALLY IN THESE MOMENTS,
IDEAS BECOME VIRAL,
AND EVERYONE WHO SIMPLY LISTENS
IS INFECTED.
NOT A SINGLE PERSON
IS IMMUNE TO NEW IDEAS,
ESPECIALLY WHEN RIDDLED
WITH TRUTH.
NOW THESE IDEAS CAN BE SHARED
ALL ACROSS THE GLOBE
IN REAL TIME.
11 YEARS AFTER THE INTERNET
WAS BORN,
THREE WORLD TRADE CENTER
BUILDINGS FELL.
IN ANY NATION, A LARGE TRAGEDY
IS A DEFINING MOMENT.
PEOPLE RALLY TOGETHER.
PEOPLE RALLY APART.
RELATIONSHIPS ARE REPAIRED,
AND OTHERS ARE DESTROYED.
TALK OF CONSPIRACY SOON CAME UP.
"DID OUR GOVERNMENT
JUST ATTACK US?
"OR IS THE OFFICIAL STORY
CORRECT?"
THIS ISSUE BECAME
QUITE SENSITIVE.
AND WHEN YOU FIND SENSITIVITY
IN A PATIENT OF MEDICINE,
PSYCHOLOGY,
AND EVEN SPIRITUALITY,
THAT IS ALWAYS A BIG RED ARROW
POINTING DIRECTLY
AT THE TAPROOT OF CHANGE.
MANY PEOPLE CONCERN THEMSELVES
WITH PROVING OR DISPROVING
THE SPECIFICS OF 9/11.
THIS, HOWEVER,
IS A SHOW ABOUT ART
AND ITS ABILITY TO BLAZE A TRAIL
THROUGH THE NONSENSE
IN ORDER TO DISCOVER
A LIVING PURPOSE.
SO, INSTEAD, LET'S EXPLORE HOW
THIS DEFINING MOMENT IN HISTORY,
COUPLED WITH THE WORLD WIDE WEB,
GAVE BIRTH TO A GENERATION
OF QUESTIONS.
LET'S TAKE A LOOK
AT HOW CONSPIRACY CULTURE
BECAME A PART
OF MAINSTREAM POP CULTURE,
AND HOW THAT WAS INSTRUMENTAL
IN THE AWAKENING OF INFINITY
IN THE MINDS OF MILLIONS.
ART CAN MAKE
YOU THINK DIFFERENTLY
ABOUT THE WORLD
THAT YOU LIVE IN,
AND THAT'S WHAT
I'M TRULY INTERESTED IN.
I WANT TO GET PEOPLE THINKING
ABOUT THE WORLD.
I KNOW THAT I DON'T HAVE IT
ALL FIGURED OUT.
I ALSO KNOW
THAT NOBODY ELSE IN THE WORLD
REALLY HAS EVERYBODY ELSE'S LIFE
FIGURED OUT FOR THEM,
SO NOBODY SHOULD REALLY BE
PUSHING THEIR AGENDA
OR THEIR OPINIONS ON OTHERS.
HOWEVER, I BELIEVE IT
TO BE VERY IMPORTANT
TO BRING UP SORE SUBJECTS.
-"LOOSE CHANGE"
WAS ONE BIG ACCIDENT.
AND IT WAS ONLY UNTIL I STARTED
TO ACTUALLY LOOK INTO THE EVENTS
OF THE DAY,
ACTUALLY STARTED
TO DO THE RESEARCH...
ESSENTIALLY, "LOOSE CHANGE"
CAME ABOUT BECAUSE I WAS --
I GOT TIRED OF HAVING
THE SAME CONVERSATIONS
AND TRYING TO CONVINCE PEOPLE
AND GOING OVER THE SAME THINGS.
AND, LIKE, I FELT LIKE I WAS
ALWAYS REPEATING MYSELF.
I REALIZED THERE WAS A BETTER
WAY TO DO IT.
LIKE, "THERE HAS TO BE A BETTER
WAY TO GET THIS INFORMATION OUT
THAN TO JUST
TELL PEOPLE MY OPINION,
AND JUST START TO TELL PEOPLE
ABOUT THE FACTS."
AND TRUTH FILMS ALLOW PEOPLE
TO KIND OF DIGEST
THE INFORMATION ON THEIR OWN,
AND KIND OF WATCH IT
WHEN THEY FEEL LIKE
THEY'RE READY TO WATCH IT.
THERE WERE A LOT OF UPS AND
DOWNS IN THE MAKING OF THE FILM,
AND THERE WERE CERTAINLY TIMES
WHERE I WAS WONDERING
IF, "A," I WAS EVER GONNA
FINISH THE FILM,
AND "B," IF I DID FINISH IT,
IF ANYONE WAS GONNA CARE.
'CAUSE, YOU KNOW,
IT'S 2004, 2005.
SO, IN MY MIND, THE SHIP
HAD ALREADY STARTED TO SAIL,
AND, YOU KNOW, I HAD ALREADY
STARTED TO MISS THE BOAT.
I FELT THAT, YOU KNOW,
I MISSED THAT OPPORTUNITY
TO BE IN THE RIGHT PLACE
AT THE RIGHT TIME.
BUT I HAD STILL DONE
ALL THIS WORK
AND I HAD SPENT TWO, THREE YEARS
OR SO WORKING ON IT,
SO I COULDN'T JUST THROW IT
ALL AWAY AND JUST GIVE UP.
SO, YOU KNOW, I TOLD MYSELF
THAT NO MATTER WHAT IT TOOK,
I WAS GONNA FINISH THAT FILM.
AFTER CINDY SHEEHAN'S SON DIED,
YOU KNOW, SHE BECAME
SORT OF A PUBLIC FIGURE,
AND BEFORE SHE KNEW IT, SHE WAS
BEING OFFERED SPEAKING TOURS
AND ENGAGEMENTS
AND THINGS OF THAT NATURE.
SO SHE EVENTUALLY MADE HER WAY
TO OUR LOCAL COLLEGE, S.U.C.O.
WE WERE FINISHING UP
THE SECOND EDITION AT THE TIME.
WE HADN'T SENT IT OFF TO PRINT,
BUT WE HAD THREE DVDs
THAT WE BURNED
OF WHAT WAS ESSENTIALLY
THE FINAL CUT OF THE FILM.
AND WE HAD JUST PRINTED UP
THESE SHIRTS
THAT SAID "INVESTIGATE 9/11"
ON THEM,
SO WE WERE FEELING PRETTY COCKY.
SO, LIKE, WE PUT ON OUR
"INVESTIGATE 9/11" SHIRTS,
WE HAD OUR BURNED COPIES
OF THE FILM.
WE WERE LIKE, "LET'S GO
TO CINDY SHEEHAN'S EVENT
AND, LET'S GIVE CINDY A COPY."
RIGHT WHEN WE WALKED IN,
TO OUR LEFT,
WE RECOGNIZED
ONE OF THE LOCAL NEWS ANCHORS.
"THAT'S DOUG COLE.
WE SEE HIM EVERY EVENING.
OH, MY GOD,
HE'S HERE TO COVER THE EVENT."
SO WE KIND OF WALKED PAST HIM,
AND THEN WE WENT OVER
AND GRABBED OUR SEATS.
AND WE WERE LIKE,
"LET'S GO TALK TO DOUG."
YOU KNOW?
LIKE, "LET'S GO GIVE HIM A DVD."
BEFORE WE COULD SAY ANYTHING
TO DOUG, DOUG POINTS AT US,
HE'S LIKE, "CAN I INTERVIEW
YOU GUYS ABOUT YOUR SHIRTS?
WHAT'S THIS WHOLE
'INVESTIGATE 9/11' THING?"
SO BEFORE WE KNEW IT, WE WERE
BEING INTERVIEWED FOR WICZ FOX.
HE WAS LIKE, "ALL RIGHT, WELL,
LET'S GET AWAY FROM THE
CONSPIRACY THEORY FOR A BIT."
YOU KNOW, LIKE, WE PRETTY MUCH
LAID IT ALL OUT, YOU KNOW?
WE TALKED ABOUT
THE STRONGEST EVIDENCE
THAT WE HAD AT THE TIME,
WHICH WAS BUILDING SEVEN,
THINGS OF THAT NATURE.
SO, WE WRAPPED UP THE INTERVIEW,
WE GAVE HIM THE DVD,
AND HE WAS LIKE, "YEAH, I'LL
CHECK IT OUT WHEN I GET HOME.
I'LL TRY TO GET YOU GUYS
ON THE AIR IF I CAN."
SO, WE TUNED INTO THE NEWS
THE NEXT NIGHT.
YOU KNOW, WE SAW THE PIECE
ON CINDY SHEEHAN,
AND WE WEREN'T IN IT.
SO WE WERE LIKE, "OH.
OF COURSE WE'RE NOT IN IT.
"I MEAN, DID WE ACTUALLY THINK
WE WERE GONNA BE ON FOX?
THAT WAS SILLY OF US."
SO, THE CINDY SHEEHAN STORY
AIRS,
AND LIKE 5, 10 MINUTES LATER,
MY PHONE STARTS RINGING.
AND I PICKED IT UP
AND IT WAS DOUG.
AND HE'S LIKE, "YO, I DON'T KNOW
IF YOU GUYS JUST WATCHED.
"I'M SORRY. I TRIED TO FIT YOU
IN TO THE CINDY SHEEHAN PIECE,
BUT IT DIDN'T WORK."
AND I WAS LIKE, "YEAH, WELL,
IT'S COOL. I UNDERSTAND, MAN.
IT'S LIKE TWO COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT STORIES."
HE'S LIKE, "YEAH, I KNOW,
BUT I WANT TO GIVE YOU
YOUR OWN STORY."
SO I WAS LIKE, "REALLY?"
HE'S LIKE, "YEAH.
"THE ONLY THING IS, LIKE --
"I WATCHED YOUR FILM
AND IT'S INCREDIBLE.
"THERE'S A LOT OF STUFF IN THERE
I JUST NEVER HEARD ABOUT.
"WHAT SHOULD I TALK ABOUT?
WHAT SHOULD I COVER
IN THE PIECE?"
IT WAS CRAZY 'CAUSE THIS
REPORTER WAS, LIKE, ASKING ME,
"WHAT DO I PUT ON THE AIR?"
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME THAT, "A,"
WE FELT THAT A REPORTER
WAS EVEN TAKING
THE INFORMATION SERIOUSLY,
AND THAT "B," THAT IT WAS
ACTUALLY GONNA BE ON THE AIR
AND BE TREATED
SOMEWHAT SERIOUSLY.
WE'RE SITTING IN THE BEDROOM.
WE WERE, LIKE,
GLUED TO THE TELEVISION,
LIKE, JUST WAITING
FOR THE PIECE TO COME UP.
AND THEN, YOU KNOW,
THE PROMO CAME UP AND SAID,
"THREE COLLEGE STUDENTS" --
NONE OF US WERE COLLEGE STUDENTS
AT THE TIME.
"THREE COLLEGE STUDENTS
HAVE MADE A FILM
"ABOUT A POSSIBLE
GOVERNMENT CONSPIRACY
ABOUT SEPTEMBER 11th."
AND WE'RE LIKE, "OH, MY GOD,
THIS IS REALLY ABOUT TO HAPPEN."
AND THEY STARTED PLAYING A CLIP
OF THE OPENING CREDITS
WITH THE BEAT GOING
AND "LOOSE CHANGE
2nd EDITION" ON THE SCREEN.
AND KOREY AND I JUST STARTED,
LIKE, SCREAMING, YOU KNOW?
JUST LIKE, "OH, MY GOD,
THIS IS HAPPENING!
"LIKE, THIS IS REALLY HAPPENING.
WE'RE ON TV RIGHT NOW.
THIS INFORMATION IS ON TV."
THE STORY ACTUALLY GOT
SO POPULAR
THAT IT CRASHED
THREE OF THEIR SERVERS.
SO, LIKE, THE STORY KEPT GOING
DOWN AND POPPING BACK UP.
AND OF COURSE EVERYONE'S LIKE,
"OH, THEY'RE GETTING PRESSURE
"FROM THE CORPORATE BIGWIGS
AT FOX.
THE GOVERNMENT'S TELLING THEM
TO TAKE DOWN THE STORY."
WICZ DID NOT ONE, NOT TWO,
BUT THREE DIFFERENT STORIES
ON US IN TOTAL.
THE FIRST TWO
WAS ALL ABOUT THE EVIDENCE
AND ALL ABOUT THE FILM ITSELF.
AND THEN THE THIRD STORY WAS ALL
ABOUT THE RESPONSE TO THE STORY,
AND HOW WE HAD CRASHED
THEIR SERVERS, ESSENTIALLY.
THAT WAS THE END OF 2005,
AND THEN 2006
WAS JUST THIS GIANT SNOWBALL
BECAUSE IT GOT COVERED ON WICZ,
SO THAT WENT VIRAL,
AND THAT KIND OF MADE THE ROUNDS
FOR A MONTH OR TWO.
WE GOT COVERED BY MIKE MALLOY
ON "AIR AMERICA,"
AND THAT WAS ANOTHER PUSH.
AND THEN, BEFORE WE KNEW IT,
WE WERE BEING INTERVIEWED
BY CNN, FOX.
IN JULY 2006, WE WERE
INTERVIEWED BY VANITY FAIR,
AND THEY DESCRIBED THE FILM
AS "THE FIRST INTERNET
BLOCKBUSTER,"
WHICH IS A QUOTE
THAT I'LL TAKE TO THE GRAVE
'CAUSE IT'S PROBABLY
THE MOST GLOWING REVIEW
THAT THE FILM EVER GOT
BECAUSE IT'S TRUE.
I MEAN, AS FAR AS I KNOW,
WE WERE THE FIRST FULL-LENGTH
FEATURE FILM TO GO VIRAL,
WHERE PEOPLE WERE, LIKE, SENDING
THE LINK TO ALL THEIR FRIENDS
AND ALL THEIR FAMILY,
AND POSTING IT ON SITES, LIKE,
"YOU HAVE TO WATCH THIS THING
ON GOOGLE VIDEO."
GOOGLE VIDEO AND "LOOSE CHANGE"
BOTH KIND OF HIT THEIR SWELL
AT THE SAME TIME,
AND IT WAS A REALLY INTERESTING
SYMBIOTIC RELATIONSHIP
THAT WE HAD.
I MEAN, WE WERE NUMBER ONE
ON GOOGLE VIDEO
FOR AT LEAST
TWO OR THREE MONTHS STRAIGHT.
WE WERE SO POPULAR THAT WHEN
STEPHEN COLBERT GAVE HIS SPEECH
AT THE WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENCE DINNER,
WE BEAT THAT.
FOR A LONG TIME, I THOUGHT
THAT I HAD MISSED THE BOAT,
AND THAT I HAD MISSED
MY OPPORTUNITY
TO BE IN THE RIGHT PLACE
AT THE RIGHT TIME.
AND THEN IT TURNED OUT
THAT THE SECOND EDITION CAME OUT
AT EXACTLY THE RIGHT PLACE
AND EXACTLY THE RIGHT TIME.
-THE ATTENTION DYLAN HAD SPARKED
SIMPLY BY CREATING A PIECE
OF AUDIOVISUAL ART
WAS FAR BEYOND
WHAT HE HAD EXPECTED,
AS IS ALL REVOLUTIONARY ART.
AND I DON'T USE THE TERM
"REVOLUTIONARY" LIGHTLY.
"LOOSE CHANGE,"
IN A MATTER OF ONE YEAR,
CHANGED MILLIONS
OF PEOPLE'S PERCEPTIONS
OF THE GOVERNMENT,
THE NATION, AND THE WORLD.
THIS IS A FILM
CALLED "ZEITGEIST"
THAT WAS RELEASED IN 2007.
THIS FILM SPOKE OF 9/11
IN CONTEXT WITH RELIGION
AND CENTRAL BANKING,
CALLING INTO QUESTION
THEIR VALIDITY.
"ZEITGEIST" WENT VIRAL
AND CAUGHT THE ATTENTION
OF ALL THOSE WHO WERE WOKEN OUT
OF THEIR DAILY SLUMBER
BY "LOOSE CHANGE."
AND "LOOSE CHANGE"
WAS ONLY POSSIBLE
BECAUSE OF THE SEVERITY
OF WHAT OCCURRED
ON U.S. SOIL SEPTEMBER 11th.
AND DYLAN SIMPLY SAID YES
TO AN INSPIRATION
THAT BEGAN AS A MISTAKE
AND BECAME
A GENERATIONAL ALARM CLOCK.
I'VE FOUND THAT THERE'S
AN ACCIDENT FACTOR
WITH MOST ARTISTS, TO WHERE,
WHEN YOU'RE DOING YOUR THING,
YOUR CRAFT,
OVER AND OVER AND OVER AGAIN,
IT'S TO THE POINT
TO WHERE IT BECOMES ROUTINE.
AND ONCE, IT WORKED.
AT ONE POINT, IT WAS
THE VERY THING YOU WERE DOING
WHEN AN INSPIRING REVELATION
CAME TO YOU,
AND IT TURNED
INTO VERY BEAUTIFUL ART.
AND THEN YOU KEEP DOING
THAT SAME THING,
HOPING TO GET THE SAME RESULT
OUT OF IT.
AND WHAT MOST ARTISTS, I THINK,
REALIZE EVENTUALLY
IS THAT DOING THE SAME THING
OVER AND OVER AND OVER AGAIN
DOES NOT ALLOW
FOR A NEW EXPERIENCE.
AND I THINK THAT INSPIRATION,
OBVIOUSLY,
IS WHAT COMMANDS OUR ATTENTION
AT ANY GIVEN TIME.
AND IF YOUR MIND WANDERS, IT'S
BECAUSE THE INSPIRATION IS LOST.
SO, WHEN AN ARTIST HAS
THAT ACCIDENT MOMENT,
USUALLY IT'S BECAUSE
THE INSPIRATION HAS BEEN LOST,
AND THE ONLY WAY
THAT THE INSPIRATION
KNOWS HOW TO MAKE ITSELF PRESENT
WITH YOU AGAIN
IS TO ALLOW THE OPPORTUNITY
FOR WHAT YOU BELIEVE
TO BE AN ACCIDENT TO OCCUR,
WHEN REALLY IT'S A DIVINE MOMENT
THAT SNAPS YOU BACK
INTO WHAT YOU'RE DOING.
"WHY DID THIS HAPPEN?
"HOW CAN I USE THIS ACCIDENT
"AND TURN IT
INTO SOMETHING BEAUTIFUL?
"HOW CAN I USE THE MOMENTUM
OF THIS ACCIDENT
TO PROPEL ME INTO A DIRECTION
THAT I'VE NEVER GONE IN BEFORE?"
AND USUALLY THOSE ACCIDENTS
TURN INTO THE VERY MOMENT
THAT RE-INVIGORATES AN ARTIST,
THAT BRINGS THEM BACK INTO
THE PROCESS OF PURE INSPIRATION,
AND DOING SOMETHING SPECIFICALLY
BECAUSE YOU FEEL
COMPELLED TO DO IT,
NOT BECAUSE IT'S BECOME
THE ROUTINE
AND YOU FEEL LIKE IT'S TIME
TO PUT OUT ANOTHER PIECE OF ART,
AND YOU JUST DO IT AGAIN.
THAT'LL ALWAYS PRODUCE
SOMETHING.
AND YOU MIGHT BE ABLE TO
CONVINCE YOURSELF
AND FOOL OTHER PEOPLE
INTO BELIEVING THAT THIS IS
MORE REVOLUTIONARY ART
WHEN, TRULY,
IT'S JUST THE NOSTALGIA
OF THE PREVIOUS REVOLUTIONARY
ART BEING BROUGHT BACK UP AGAIN.
AND I THINK THAT ACCIDENT FACTOR
IS WHAT DYLAN EXPERIENCED.
I KNOW I'VE EXPERIENCED IT.
AND THAT USUALLY TURNS OUT
TO BE THE EXACT RIGHT THING
AT THE EXACT RIGHT TIME.
THOSE ACCIDENTS ALWAYS SEEM
TO BE THE EXACT RIGHT THING
FOR PEOPLE TO HEAR
AT THAT MOMENT.
AND USUALLY COMPLETELY
UNBEKNOWNST TO THE ARTIST,
IT'S THE THING THAT WILL CREATE
A REVOLUTION
IN THE MINDS OF MILLIONS
OF PEOPLE ACROSS THE GLOBE.
-WE WERE NUMBER ONE
ON GOOGLE VIDEO
FOR AT LEAST
TWO OR THREE MONTHS STRAIGHT.
WE WERE SO POPULAR THAT WHEN
STEPHEN COLBERT GAVE HIS SPEECH
AT THE WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENCE DINNER,
WE BEAT THAT.
AND IT'S FUNNY 'CAUSE, LIKE,
NUMBER ONE WOULD BE
"LOOSE CHANGE,"
AND THEN NUMBER SIX WOULD BE,
LIKE, "LOOSE CHANGE" IN SPANISH,
AND THEN NUMBER 13 WOULD BE
"LOOSE CHANGE" IN FRENCH.
I MEAN, WE DOMINATED
GOOGLE VIDEO IN ITS HEYDAY.
I MEAN, YOU COULDN'T CLICK
ANYWHERE ON THAT SITE
WITHOUT SEEING OUR FILM.
-THE COUPLING OF THE INTERNET
AND AMAZING NEW CONCEPTS THAT
PEOPLE HAVEN'T PONDERED BEFORE
CAME TOGETHER,
AND THE ONE "X" FACTOR TO IT
IS THE DELIVERY OF THAT CONTENT.
da VINCI, RAPHAEL, MASACCIO,
MICHELANGELO, SALVADOR DALí,
GREAT ARTISTS THAT CHANGED
PEOPLE'S PERSPECTIVE
ON THE WORLD --
THEY DID IT BY DOING SOMETHING
SO REVOLUTIONARY
THAT PEOPLE COULD NOT GO BACK TO
THEIR PREVIOUS WAY OF THINKING
BECAUSE ALL THEY SAW
WAS THE NEW PATTERN
THAT THAT ARTIST
HAD BROUGHT TO LIGHT.
AND I THINK THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT "LOOSE CHANGE" WAS.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
"ZEITGEIST" WAS.
IT BROUGHT PEOPLE WHO WEREN'T
THINKING ABOUT THESE THINGS,
AND IT OPENED THEIR EYES.
AND NOW THEY'RE LOOKING AROUND
ASKING QUESTIONS.
-WE MANAGED TO GET 3,000 PEOPLE
TO COME TO NEW YORK CITY
ON THE 5-YEAR ANNIVERSARY
OF SEPTEMBER 11th.
WE HAD THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
WEARING OUR SHIRTS
AND HANDING OUT DVDs.
WE PRINTED UP 10,000 DVDs
AND 600 SHIRTS
AND GAVE THEM ALL AWAY.
YOU COULDN'T WALK ANYWHERE
IN LOWER MANHATTAN
WITHOUT SEEING
AN "INVESTIGATE 9/11" SHIRT,
AND WITHOUT SOMEONE
HANDING YOU A DVD
OR OVERHEARING A CONVERSATION.
WE COMPLETELY TOOK OVER
LOWER MANHATTAN
ON THE 5-YEAR ANNIVERSARY
OF SEPTEMBER 11th.
EVERY ANNIVERSARY
AFTER 9/11/2006
WAS DIMINISHING RETURNS.
THERE WERE LESS AND LESS PEOPLE
SHOWING UP.
SO WE WENT FROM COMPLETELY
TAKING OVER LOWER MANHATTAN
AND BEING IN EVERYONE'S FACE
TO JUST THIS KIND OF
LITTLE BLOCK OVER HERE
THAT NOBODY WANTED TO GO NEAR.
THERE WERE A LOT OF THINGS
THAT PUSHED ME AWAY
FROM THE MOVEMENT.
BETWEEN JUST ALL THE NEGATIVE
ENERGY THAT I GOT FROM IT,
ALL THE DEATH THREATS
AND ALL THE --
SEEING MY FACE AND MY NAME
EVERYWHERE ON THE INTERNET.
I WAS JUST TRYING TO GET
INFORMATION OUT,
AND I WAS DOING IT
THE ONLY WAY I KNEW HOW,
WHICH WAS TO MAKE A FILM.
IT JUST SO HAPPENED THAT
THE FILM GOT INSANELY POPULAR,
AND I HAD TO DEAL
WITH THE REPERCUSSIONS
OF THAT POPULARITY.
MY HEART JUST WASN'T IN IT,
YOU KNOW?
IT WAS SO TIRING TO JUST SIT
THERE AND JUST, LIKE...
YOU CAN ONLY WATCH THAT FOOTAGE
FOR SO LONG
BEFORE IT REALLY JUST STARTS TO,
LIKE, EAT AWAY AT YOU.
I MEAN, LIKE, EVERY TIME
THOSE TOWERS COME DOWN,
YOU'RE WATCHING THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE DIE.
THERE NEEDS TO BE
A MASSIVE CHANGE
IN THE WORLD IN WHICH WE LIVE
AND THE CULTURE
IN WHICH WE LIVE.
SOMEONE NEEDS TO HIT
THE "RESET" BUTTON.
PEOPLE TELL PEOPLE TO WAKE UP
AND SEE THE TRUTH ABOUT 9/11,
BUT I THINK THAT THEY JUST NEED
TO WAKE UP
AND SEE THE TRUTH
ABOUT WHAT IT MEANS TO BE ALIVE
AND THE GIFT THAT WE'RE GIVEN
WHEN WE'RE PLACED
ONTO THIS PLANET.
-THE FIRST MISCONCEPTION I HAD
OF THESE FREE, INDEPENDENT,
AND ANONYMOUS DOCUMENTARIES
WAS, "WOW, THERE MUST BE
SOMETHING REALLY GOING ON
"UNDERNEATH THE SURFACE
"THAT I'M JUST NOW
COMING TO FIND OUT ABOUT.
"MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
MUST KNOW ABOUT THIS,
AND ARE ALREADY WORKING TOGETHER
TO CHANGE THIS."
AND COME TO FIND OUT THAT
IT'S USUALLY JUST ONE INDIVIDUAL
WORKING ON THEIR LAPTOP
WITH STOCK FOOTAGE
AND SOME CRACKED SOFTWARE
THAT THEY GOT FROM SOMEONE,
WHEREAS BEFORE YOU WOULD NEED
A MILLION-DOLLAR STUDIO
AND $100,000 WORTH
OF WORK AND PAYROLL
AND WHATEVER ELSE YOU MIGHT NEED
TO GET A FILM LIKE THIS
TOGETHER.
YOU DON'T NEED ALL THE RESOURCES
AND ALL THE MONEY
AND ALL THE TIME AND ENERGY
IN THE WORLD.
ALL YOU NEED IS AN IDEA
AND A BEAUTIFUL WAY
TO DELIVER IT.
THAT'S AN ARTIST RIGHT THERE.
-ORDINARY PEOPLE
WITH EXTRAORDINARY IDEAS.
INTERNETWORKING.
SOCIAL NETWORKING.
A SOURCE OF EVER-CHANGING
AND BOUNDLESS IDEAS
LIMITED ONLY BY YOUR CAPACITY
TO IMAGINE BIG AND DREAM FAR.
SOMETIMES THE ONLY WAY
TO MOVE FORWARD IS TO MOVE ON,
TAKING WITH YOU NOT THE VEHICLE,
BUT THE MOMENTUM IT PROVIDED.
MANY DREAMS FALL SHORT
WHEN THE DREAMER
THINKS THE DREAM TO BE OVER
SIMPLY BECAUSE HE WOKE UP.
DREAMERS FOLLOW THEIR PASSION
AND USE THEIR BELIEFS
TO PROPEL THEM TOWARDS IT.
BELIEF IS NOT A ROAD
NOR A VEHICLE.
IT IS A FUEL.
YOU ARE THE VEHICLE,
AND YOUR BELIEFS
MOVE YOU DOWN THE ROAD
INTO THE PARTS OF YOUR PASSION
YOU NEVER KNEW EXISTED.
IN THE PREVIOUS EPISODE,
WE INVITED YOU TO IMAGINE
WHY A BLUES PROGRESSION
ON THE PIANO MAKES SENSE
WHEN A MADMAN HITTING THE KEYS
IS SENSELESS.
IT SIMPLY FEELS RIGHT.
THERE'S A CENTER TO IT,
A POINT AROUND
WHICH ALL THE NOTES REVOLVE.
IF YOU CAN KEEP
SOMEONE'S ATTENTION
LONG ENOUGH TO TELL A STORY
AND MAKE A POINT,
PEOPLE JUST MIGHT BELIEVE YOU.
JUST THE FACT THAT THEY ARE
IMAGINING YOUR STORY
MEANS THEY ARE CREATING A SPACE
IN THEIR MIND
TO MOVE YOUR IDEA
INTO THEIR BELIEF,
MEANING THEY ARE WILLING
TO LET YOUR VERSION OF TRUTH
BE THE FUEL THAT COMPELS THEM
TO DO SOMETHING
OR EMBODY SOMETHING.
WHO CARES IF NO ONE ELSE
BELIEVES WHAT YOU BELIEVE?
ITS ONLY PURPOSE IS TO MOVE YOU.
HAND, FOOT, FREIGHT TRAIN --
ANYTHING CAN PUSH YOU.
THE MOTION IS WHAT'S IMPORTANT.
SO, WHO IS STEERING?
IT'S EASY TO SEE
THAT ANYTHING CAN BE VIRAL.
SOME THINGS GO VIRAL
JUST TO MAKE YOU LAUGH.
[ CRASHING ]
SOME MAKE YOU CHEER.
OTHERS MAKE YOU CRY.
BUT SOME OF THEM,
JUST A FEW OF THEM,
CAN SHATTER SUCH AN ILLUSION
OF YOURS
THAT YOU HAVE NO OTHER CHOICE
BUT TO CHANGE THE ENTIRE
DIRECTION OF YOUR LIFE.
IN TRUTH, THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT REALITY IS.
IT'S WHATEVER
MAKES MOST SENSE TO YOU.
IT DOESN'T MEAN
THAT IT'S A FACT.
IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT
IT'S GOING TO BE TRUE TOMORROW.
IT JUST MEANS RIGHT NOW, TODAY,
IT MAKES SENSE TO YOU,
AS IF TODAY YOU'RE IN THE MOOD
FOR ONE KIND OF A SONG,
AND TOMORROW YOU'RE IN THE MOOD
FOR ANOTHER KIND OF A SONG.
TWO COMPLETELY DIFFERENT THINGS
THAT MAKE SENSE TO YOU AT TWO
COMPLETELY DIFFERENT TIMES.
TRUTH IS ELUSIVE.
TRUTH ISN'T A FIXED THING.
IT'S LIKE THE CLOUDS.
THE CLOUDS ARE ALWAYS THERE,
BUT THEY ALWAYS LOOK DIFFERENT.
YOU COULD SAY,
"LOOK UP IN THE CLOUDS.
"THAT ONE LOOKS LIKE A SHEEP."
AND EVERYBODY THINKS,
"YES, YOU'RE RIGHT.
"THAT'S WHAT
THE CLOUDS LOOK LIKE."
AND THEN TWO MINUTES LATER,
THE CLOUDS CHANGE.
EVERYTHING AROUND THEM CHANGES.
THE PATTERNS WITHIN THEM CHANGE,
AND SOMEBODY POINTS OUT,
"YOU KNOW WHAT, THAT LOOKS
MORE LIKE A WOLF TO ME."
AND THEN EVERYBODY STARTS
FREAKING OUT.
"OH, MY GOD, YOU'RE RIGHT.
THERE'S WOLVES IN THE SKY."
IT'S DANGEROUS.
NOW WE HAVE A LAND OF WOLVES.
AND THEN A FEW MINUTES LATER,
THAT PATTERN CHANGES
AND IT'S SOMETHING ELSE.
SO, WHICH ONE OF THEM IS TRUE?
THE CLOUD.
THE CLOUD IS TRUE.
IT'S THE ESSENCE.
IT'S WHAT THE TRUTH
IS MADE UP OF.
IT'S NOT WHAT
YOU CAN SAY ABOUT IT.
IT'S NOT ANY DETAILS,
AND IT'S NOT EVEN A SPECIFIC
PATTERN YOU CAN BRING OUT OF IT,
'CAUSE YOU CAN LOOK AT ANY CLOUD
AND SAY IT LOOKS LIKE ANYTHING.
AND TO YOU, IF IT MAKES SENSE,
THEN THAT'S YOUR TRUTH.
IF YOU'RE CYNICAL OR SKEPTICAL,
OR IF YOU'RE COMPLETELY
GULLIBLE,
BOTH OF THOSE ARE AN IMBALANCE
OF YOU HAVING A PURE VIEW
OF WHAT YOU BELIEVE TO BE TRUE.
WHATEVER MAKES
MOST SENSE TO YOU.
WHATEVER INSPIRES YOU
RIGHT NOW AT THIS MOMENT,
THAT IS YOURS.
LET YOUR TRUTH
DO ALL THE STEERING.
LET YOUR INSPIRATION LEAD YOU,
NOT THE FACTS,
NOT THE WOLF, NOT THE SHEEP.
FOR OUR LIVES ARE BUILT UPON
MOMENTS THAT MOVE US,
NOSTALGIC SYMBOLS THAT REPRESENT
THE LOVE WE HAVE,
THE HISTORY,
THE DARES WE TOOK,
THE CHANGES IN PERCEPTION
WE MADE,
THE FAMILY THAT SUPPORTED US,
ALL RESTING UPON A FOUNDATION
OF OUR DREAMS,
THE SOIL FROM WHICH WHAT YOU
REAP, YOU WILL ONE DAY SOW.